there's actually a dna clock that tells
our bodies how old we are we i could
take your blood and read it
and i could tell you roughly when you're
going to die
there's just too many people who aren't
exercising enough or correctly at all
they're just sort of withering away if
people could do one thing and leave this
conversation with nothing else other
than muscle is the organ of longevity
and eat high quality protein anyone who
says we've reached our maximum limit
doesn't know what they're talking about
well so i've been studying these enzymes
the sirtuins we have seven in our bodies
i've been studying them for about 25
years
and what we've learned is that they
respond to the cellular
environment
there's a chemical that they require for
gas think of them as the fuel called nad
and there's another molecule that is
like the accelerator on the enzymes
that makes them going even faster and
that's one of them is called resveratrol
which we discovered years ago from red
wine and together they actually do
really great things on these enzymes and
make them keep the body younger at least
for 25 years we've been studying mostly
animals
and even little fungi
yi cells and what we've learned from
those studies is that
these are largely
involved in responding to when organisms
are under threat of survival
so how do you make the body feel like
it's under threat
adversity
so one is run a lot or at least become
out of breath you know a few times a
week your body will say oh man
we had we had to outpace one of those
saber-toothed cats again
got to go to build up the body um the
other is to be hungry either a couple of
times a week or every day you know skip
a meal or two and then your body will
turn on these sirtuins make more of that
fuel nad for the enzymes and we think
that's what's
in part responsible for the health
benefits of those lifestyle choices all
right one thing though that you talk
about that i found really interesting is
this notion of what may be good for you
when you're young may come back to bite
you in the ass when you're older yeah so
it's like um the whole notion of
hormesis that a little bit of bad is
actually extraordinarily good which is
exactly what you're describing now get
out of breath do all the stuff and so
when the information started pouring out
that the only thing across every known
living organism that extends lifespan is
to eat less which you talk about in your
own book it feels like you're saying to
do it for that reason just don't put as
much stress on the system but now i hear
you saying no no what you actually want
to do is stress the system won't that
stress
of i just ran from a lion a [__]
starving won't that begin to stack up
and become problematic
well actually if you step on a snail
it's gonna die so
there's certain amounts of stress that
that you don't want to do but what you
want to do is
get the body to fear adversity in the
future but not enough to cause lasting
damage or the unspooling of the dna
that'll lead to disease and eventually
death so you don't want to overdo it you
want to be a little bit puffed you want
to be a little bit hungry but of course
starvation malnutrition is not going to
make you live longer so it's a fine line
and what we've learned from many animal
studies and increasing numbers of
clinical trials in humans is that you
want to pulse it let the body recover
not constant we used to make animals go
hungry all their lives and it worked but
it actually works better if you let them
recover and i think that's that's the
secret then let's really dive into that
so i'm guessing you're talking about
where
animals were denied something like 20 to
30 percent of their caloric intake for
very long periods of time is extending
their life by what like 30 or something
um
so super interesting but you're saying
that if their caloric intake over a long
period of time is roughly the same of an
animal that's just allowed to eat until
it's satiated that if it's done in a
pulse pattern of hunger
and almost over feed
they actually have the same benefits as
the animal that has a chronic deficit of
calories
all right well let's be clear nobody
knows what the perfect diet is even when
it comes to fasting it's all
largely based on
rodent studies so what i can tell you
about the rodent studies which i'm very
familiar with
is that if you take a rodent and reduce
its calories by 25
for its whole life
it will live longer 30
but it'll be really miserable and
aggressive uh and that's true for us as
well i've tried calorie restriction for
about a week and i gave up i was pretty
angry but what we discovered our my
colleagues um discovered is that
if you
it's not just what you eat it's when you
eat that's important and what's been
found is that if as long as you have
that period of hunger in a mouse so you
can feed them every other day
then they can gorge themselves as much
as they want and they do they eat about
of what a mouse having free access to
food would eat
but they
they have the same longevity benefit as
a mouse that's always been hungry and if
that's true what that means is for us is
that we can enjoy life as long as we
have that period of hunger once a day or
maybe twice a week and i believe the
only reason we age
um
you know we could live for a thousand
years
otherwise the only reason we age is that
our repair systems
become complacent
you mentioned that what
what is beneficial for you when you're
young come back to bite you when you're
old what we think is that these repair
systems are very good when we're young
so the idea is it's called antagonistic
pleiotropy and i think it's right and
that is that we evolved to stay healthy
and alive and fit till we're 40
and then the forces of natural selection
decline after that because we've
essentially bred
we've often had children
but we don't need to stick around beyond
that and building a body that will last
a thousand years is pointless at that
you know so most species only live as
long as they need to to reproduce and
then a little bit more
if you're a mouse that could die within
two years they only build a body that
lasts two years if you're a whale that
has no predators you can live for a
couple of hundred years that makes more
sense
hope you enjoyed the episode brought to
you by our sponsor ombre labs get 70 off
your at-home gut health test when you go
to try
ombre.com forward slash impact enjoy the
episode
if people could do one thing
and leave this conversation with nothing
else other than muscle is the organ of
longevity and eat high quality protein
animal protein and plant protein are
totally different and if you have a diet
of plant protein it is very hard to
sustain and calorically devastating
because you need between 25 and 40
percent more so it's like six cups of
quinoa for one small chicken breast if
you really wanted to think about the
amino acids necessary to stimulate that
tissue and listen that's not the only
way to do it could we add in branched
chain amino acids to lower quality
protein absolutely but why would you do
that when we have
you know cattle or a ruminants that have
that we've been consuming for two and a
half million years and have the capacity
to take low quality plant nutrition and
produce high quality
nutrition with that is nutrient dense
and highly bioavailable for humans so i
understand i've heard you say the same
thing like i understand people have they
may have a um a moral desire to eat
plant-based food and i get that due to
somebody who's absolutely i just love
animals and i long for the day where we
can lab grow meat and that there was
never an animal i'm involved in that
process but i'm also
just selfish enough to say i'm going to
protect my health
you know when you look at obviously
sustainable farming and things like that
i'm all for it i couldn't be more behind
that
but
wanting to understand sort of at a
mechanistic cellular level what's
happening and i don't care what the
answer is vegan vegetarian animal a mix
thereof
i just want to understand like at a
cellular level what's happening
and to
get that i think understanding the
what branch chain amino acids are
why they matter and how the profiles
differ from plants to meat i think would
be really helpful yeah i i couldn't
agree with you more so really the
quality of our diet
and this is globally the quality of our
diet is largely dependent on protein so
there's 20 amino acids
and nine of those are essential
of those essential amino acids and
essential meaning i i cannot produce it
in my body exactly
so the key branch chain amino acids and
when you think about branched chain it's
just a structure right it's just a
nomenclature you've got leucine
isoleucine and baline and out of those
three which by the way should all be
consumed together because everything in
life has its own balance
of those three amino acids leucine is
the most relevant for protecting the
organ of longevity and on a cellular
level having the right amount at one
time dosed appropriately
which is where that two and a half grams
that's from the that's just from
research you know it's really truthfully
it's between 1.8 to 2.5 grams of leucine
which the majority of people are not
going to go
hmm how much leucine is in my food right
it's not on the back of a label which
just goes to show you how protein has
been the black sheep of the
macronutrient family for decades
when you look at a label all it simply
says is protein but understanding on a
cellular level that really
eating protein at a meal centric dosing
meaning you at one time you're not
drinking protein shakes over a course of
two hours but at one meal at a boldest
amount you are getting
between 30 and 50 grams of protein which
would translate to
between four and six ounces of high
quality protein would reach that leucine
threshold so once you reach that leucine
threshold you trigger this
this complex called mtor
mtor is the mechanistic target of
rapamycin which then is actually a
nutrient sensor
anything below that the body's like i
don't care i'm not going to put on
muscle or i don't care i'm not going to
really stimulate this very expensive
elaborate process for the body it
doesn't care
so that's where you get skinny fat
because you're grazing all day at this
low threshold meal especially important
in aging because you don't have that
flexibility
and when i say aging i'm talking about
40s
you know you've got to stay on top of it
but once you reach that threshold
of arguably two and a half grams of
leucine which you could have a two
ounces of fish and then a scoop of
branched chain and get up that leucine
level but mechanistically you need that
branch chain that essential amino acid
to then
trigger the rest of what needs to happen
for muscle protein synthesis and listen
the way that they measure muscle protein
synthesis
it's not like you eat it and then you're
laying down protein it truly i mean
that's not an accurate assessment right
i would be
um not being truthful if i said that but
it really is a period of time over a
period of time as you continue to do
with anything correct
optimized habits
you then can protect your tissue
and protecting tissue is everything
you know and it's very dangerous because
when people do weight loss
you know you lose some fat but you also
lose tissue
and now we're in a situation where we're
not outside and we're not doing
resistance training
and we're not actually moving that
endocrine organ
so you know it becomes much more
difficult to maintain and recoup that
tissue and the tissue is just one aspect
it's truly the metabolic aspects
you know of the of muscle and if you
want to prevent diabetes
heart disease alzheimer's
cardiovascular you know cardiovascular
disease that whole spectrum
tissue you know muscle tissue will do
that for you and then you put on high
quality protein
you're going to keep inflammation low
you're going to keep calories in check
you're going to up regulate your
thermoeffective feeding these are all
really important you're going to do
you're going to have lower blood
pressure because some of the amino acids
one in particular helps lower blood
pressure
i mean this is amazing stuff it's a
muscle-centric approach to wellness and
the paradigm is totally wrong
human beings are wired in a certain
sense to go out and slay dragons to
climb our own personal mount everest to
to get out and and just to move right
living in a modern post-industrial
largely sedentary era
we no longer are scratching that itch
with our jobs unless you're lucky enough
to be a construction worker
or a painter or you know like my wife
out there you know bringing alfalfa to
the goats and the wheelbarrow and taking
care of the chickens and pulling weeds
out in the garden and just being out in
the sunshine lifting heavy rocks every
once in a while
or maybe you know you're you're you're a
hunter gatherer
if you don't fall into any of those
categories
you get to the end of the work day or or
start the beginning of the work day and
you do have this ancestral itch to move
and hence we now live in an era
of crossfit boxes and pop-up gyms and
quick done-for-you 45-minute super
brutal exercise sessions
to replace what would have normally just
been our day-to-day job a hundred years
ago and you know
up until very recently gyms
and exercise and beating up and
buffeting the body that was the realm of
athletes and gymnasts and and warriors
and knights and gladiators and it wasn't
something the average person really even
felt the pressure to do
you know you want to survive you want to
get through the day you know you you
want to move and this idea of
intentionally starving yourself for
fasting and also intentionally beating
up the body with exercise like this is a
relatively new phenomenon you know in an
area where we're sitting all day and
surrounded by food you know we've got to
figure out a way to kind of kind of
fight that battle right so we fast and
we exercise
but
the idea with exercise is of course we
don't see
to return and kick this horse to death
not many of the blue zones or longevity
hot spots engaging in formal exercise
sessions right they are moving lifting
heavy things every once in a while
occasionally sprinting or playing game
of soccer or tennis or you know if you
look at it in in terms of like an
ancestral context maybe running from a
lion
but you know we're we're not doing a lot
of those things now and so we need to to
go to the gym now what research has
shown is that you know to respond more
directly to your question about how much
more than 60 minutes of intense exercise
let's you know let's say like a crossfit
intensity once you see about 60 minutes
of that which sounds ridiculous but i
know a lot of people who are who are
literally pushing themselves with two a
days or or exercising hard more than 60
minutes a day you see a law of
diminishing returns and an increased
risk of mortality and in the same way
with aerobic exercise let's say moderate
aerobic exercise right where you're
pretty aware that you're exercising it's
not like you're out picking weeds in
your garden once you exceed about 90
minutes of that you also see an
increased risk of mortality a decreased
rate of return on your exercise and we
see things like a cardiomegaly like in
an enlarged left ventricle of the heart
we see increased risk for arterial
stiffness so it appears to be about 60
minutes of intense exercise and 90
minutes of aerobic exercise where you
definitely see a law of diminishing
returns
and so
what i recommend that people do
is a you hack your environment so that
you are somehow trying to simulate
that
all day long low-level physical activity
type of scenario you get a standing
workstation you get a treadmill
workstation you litter your office or
your cubicle with things that allow you
to do short movement spurts throughout
the day such as a kettlebell to stop and
do some kettlebell swings
or
jumping jacks or you know i even have a
hex bar in my office with some plates on
it where i can lift heavy things every
once in a while when i take a break so i
work hard for 25 minutes take five
minutes move change positions walk swing
kettlebell do a few pull-ups lift the
hex bar a few times keep going
you know i wait to take all my phone
calls until the afternoon when i can go
outside in the sunshine and walk and
take my phone calls so you figure out a
way to get your body to be to engage in
low-level physical activity during the
entire day the way i like to think of it
is that exercise should be an option
when you've finished your day not a
necessity then when you do exercise
exercise with the minimum effective dose
of exercise walking is one of my
favorite modes of exercise period
because i can you know i can talk on a
phone while i'm doing it i can be in the
sunshine very low barrier to entry i can
do it when i'm sleep deprived i can go
see a city when i'm in a city i can it
can be functional if i'm commuting
but walking speed particularly walking
at a slightly faster rate than what is
comfortable for you slightly faster than
your stroll rate and being kind of
cognizant of your walking speed as
you're walking like pushing yourself to
walk just a little bit faster than you
want to walk walking speed is correlated
with longevity as well
and i'll throw one other at you
this particular mode of exercise
involves cold exposure it involves
hypoxia it involves some amount of
sensory deprivation you know swimming
just swimming just swimming interesting
that you call that century
oh if you've uh you know this is one of
the favorite things i like to do in the
mornings when i travel is i'll get into
a pool at the hotel and i go under the
water i hold my breath i go under the
water back and forth and when i need to
come up for a breath i come up for a
breath and i train myself how to control
the heart rate and it's even better if
the pool's a little bit cold right so
you're getting some of your cold therapy
and then as soon as i've recovered my
breath i go back under and it's peaceful
and you can't hear much other than the
little swish of your hands or the swish
of your feet your heart rates up you're
training your breath you're a little bit
cold and you're sensory deprived so you
almost get a very kind of meditative
feeling from it so swimming
swimming i'm gonna be the one
let's talk about ombre labs did you know
that your gut is related to so many
health issues trouble focusing bloating
constipation maintaining a healthy
weight and skin blemishes like acne and
eczema and when gut health is poor it
can directly contribute to these types
of health concerns my wife lisa has
struggled with gut problems so i know
exactly how troublesome this can be
unfortunately lisa is not alone in this
battle one in five americans are
struggling with gut health issues
thankfully we can fix a lot of these
issues with the better diet and the
right probiotics and ombre labs makes
this process really simple by offering
an at home gut health test so you can
know the state of your gut health and
what problems it may be causing ombre
labs will then use your results to
develop custom probiotics to help treat
these problems these aren't the one size
fits all probiotics you will find at the
grocery store these are personalized to
you based on the results of the test you
can get 70 percent off your at home gut
health test when you go to
tryombre.com forward slash impact that's
tryombre.com
impact ombre labs again try
ombre
ombre.com for 70 off your at-home gut
health test all right guys take care and
be legendary
so far my my exploration to this topic
has has suggested a couple of things so
one is we do tend to disproportionately
load joints over muscles
so in an ideal world you would want to
figure out a way to exercise where you
can maximally load the muscle while
minimally loading the joint so there is
a lot of joint failure that becomes
problematic i mean and i'm separating
the obvious which is there's just too
many people who aren't exercising enough
or correctly at all and so they're just
sort of withering away but if you
come at this through the lens of okay
well what if we're dealing with a subset
of people who are committed to figuring
out how can they exercise best in many
ways it's just a lack of specificity
right so
most people who exercise
can't actually tell you why they're
doing what they're doing the 99.9
percent of us who don't get paid to play
a sport and who aren't even really
competing at a serious level outside the
professional ranks
i don't think we know what our sport is
and i think the sport should be
being the most kick-ass 100 year old
that ever lived
so what would that look like like what
does it mean to be the most kick-ass 100
year old and i think you have to then
reverse engineer all of the things one
should be able to do
so a kick-ass 100 year old should be
able to
i don't know i'm making this up because
i haven't fully codified this yet but
they should certainly be able to carry
two 25-pound bags from a grocery store
they should be able to lift a 30 or 40
pound bag over their head to put it in a
you know compartment of an airport of an
airplane they should be able to
have a you know 25 pound little terror
run at them you know by either great
grandchild dip down into a squat and
grab them and pick them up they should
be able to jump down on the floor and
play with cars or dolls and stand up
without assistance and if you start to
map out the 25 or 35 things that becomes
a new decathlon so instead of saying the
decathlon is running this distance
jumping this far swimming this far it's
like great those are kind of arbitrary
now we're going to come up with like
real world things that you have to be
able to do when you're 100 if you want
to live
what i would describe as potentially
a more fulfilling physical life to enjoy
the fruits of having not died by that
point in your life
all right so how do we build towards
that i love this by the way like i
always tell people i want to live
forever i'm well aware that as of right
now i'm going to die
so my thing is how do we stay alive long
enough to give time for these step
function breakthroughs to happen so
what do i do like what are the things
that i train or the hormone replacement
therapies that i need to go what do i
need to watch what are those things that
i should be doing
taking a step back i would say three
years ago eighty to ninety percent of my
energy went into how to not die
which basically is strategy yeah which
is tantamount to how do you delay the
onset of chronic disease so the
mathematical equivalent of longevity
from a lifespan perspective is creating
a phase shift in disease onset
if you want to live to a hundred
it basically means you have to delay the
onset by about two decades of every
major chronic disease so it doesn't mean
you can't get cancer or heart disease or
any of these other things but you better
figure out a way to get them 20 years
after the average person gets them
i would say now that occupies 50 percent
of my brainwave energy whatever and much
more time goes into two other things
which is how to minimize suffering which
is kind of an emotional problem and then
how to be this kick-ass 100 year old so
to the latter
um
the model i have in my mind is that of
sort of bruce lee bruce lee
sort of looked at each and every
discipline of martial arts including
boxing and wrestling and things like
that and said
let me extract from each of these
disciplines that which i believe is
useful discard those that i think are
useless and create a perfect fighting
form that is truly geared towards
self-defense so it is not a sport there
is no tournament there is no rank there
is no belt there is no sensei it is can
you handle yourself in a life or death
situation
if i go to a yoga class
or if i do a pilates class invariably
there's something in there that i think
is really valuable and truthfully
there's a bunch of stuff that i'm like i
don't need this this is just if i had
infinite time this would be fine to do
but i don't have infinite time
so now you apply a constraint to the
problem which is not only do you want to
be sort of the best hundred year old
imaginable what if you're only willing
to spend 10 to 12 hours a week preparing
for that
and so you say okay well so there's a
new sport which we defined some of the
parameters of that's your new olympics
and that olympics is 50 years from now
how will you train for it if you're only
willing to spend 10 to 12 hours a week
training for it
well my guess is you will take a lot of
things
from various disciplines discard a lot
of things and sort of have to build a
very bespoke
routine around it that will involve the
maintenance of muscle mass joint
integrity flexibility
functional movement balance things that
we don't even really think about anymore
how many times does someone who's 90
fall because they've lost their balance
and it's that fall that ultimately leads
to their demise how much of that the
balancing do you think is neurological
and how much is
physical they're just not doing enough
physical [__] to figure out to maintain
that my guess is it's probably both
there's a stability issue that starts to
go away as you age also the consequences
of a fall become much more apparent so
um
it's probably not just the case that
someone who's older falls that much more
it might be that the
the severity of the injury becomes so
much more severe so right now if i were
walking here and i tripped on that stair
and fell you know maybe on a really
really bad day i break my wrist right
but most likely nothing happens
in 50 years if i do that same thing the
probability that something bad happens
is going to be much greater
but that said i already can tell my
balance is not what it was when i was 20
when i was 15. i mean i used to do
i still do this exercise when i was 15
where i would do a with blindfolded i
could do a single leg squat with the up
with the non-squatting leg straight out
in front of me so i could go all the way
to the floor and all the way up arms
crossed blindfolded i could do 20 each
leg
i can't do that once today with my eyes
open
[Music]
so admittedly i'm nowhere near as strong
as i used to be so there's a strength
component but i also just clearly lack
the balance
and so so the question is
now maybe that activity is a bit over
you know it's just unnecessary um
and again i don't know what the answer
is i don't know if this means i need to
get out there and practice on a
tightrope or something like but there's
there's something that needs to be done
so
every time i do some sort of
really well thought out workout i find
myself thinking god like some percentage
of this is so essential
all of those things need to be put into
this new discipline this new sport which
is called for lack of a better word
being a kick-ass hundred-year-old
so for me it came out of necessity right
i was in my late 30s and i
was on qvc all the time and i remember
one day i was getting my makeup done i
was like
this is crazy i feel like i just
accelerated my aging overnight something
happened and it's really weird because
it's taking so much more time to sort of
bring my glow out and my skin feels dull
and i feel like dull energy wise and
this is not gonna work for the amount of
things that i want to do in my life and
i think for every single one of us right
sometimes you can have this feeling of
oh my god i'm like held back by just
sort of this toxic feeling inside
and
i became really passionate about this
idea of
what is it at the cellular level that
will give me that energy back and i knew
that my cells
were either building like building up
you know through the protein and
different nutrients or they were
detoxing and this is very much the
layman thought process i was just
thinking they're eliminating
crap right like my cells are either
building on themselves and they're
replicating or they're eliminating junk
and maybe they're dying off but i didn't
know that there was an actual biological
process that occurred so fast forward to
italy i'm in the orchard with this
brilliant phd dr elizabeth janda and she
opens up a citrus bergamot fruit shows
the white
gives it to me i'm eating it we go back
to our lab we're drinking this tea all
day long the citrus tea i'm like i love
this tea but what's the deal like i've
never drank so much tea other than when
i was in japan where they were just
drinking green tea three four five cups
a day and she was doing the same with
the citrus tea and she's like oh it's my
anti-aging secret
and um it activates my autophagy
yeah what's that word
and i started to learn from her she
explained to me that this process is
something that we all have in every
single one of our cells it's almost like
a little doctor
inside of each of your cells that says
okay
time to recycle this part these
organelles need to be removed this needs
to be killed this needs to be
strengthened and so autophagy is like
this brilliance within our cells and
there's so many ways to activate it and
there are so many ways to deactivate it
you don't always want to keep it on
right like it's kind of like the ocean
back and forth
so she told me about it
and i came back to u.s
and i was obsessed and i was on a
mission
and that was like five years ago
and i knew
when my when i looked at my skin and i
saw that i had experienced these
accelerated agers
and i looked older than i was and i
actually looked at a picture of my
mother at 37 years old i grabbed this
photo of her and i looked at a picture
of me and i looked so much older than
she did oh like this is really messed up
like i know i put a lot more stress on
myself
you know i travel around the globe like
on average eight times a year whoa yeah
i'm i'm on the go um
so i'm dealing with a lot of that i have
four kids you know
built i was running you know twin lab
ceo of twin lab i had sold my company to
them
public company
so all of these factors
put stress
but still i shouldn't have been looking
that much older than my mother and so
that's when i got into activating
autophagy okay that's really interesting
and let's um sort of bring it down from
the scientific for a second because so i
heard you on bulletproof radio
and dave was talking about how wow your
skin really looks good in person and so
the second i saw you i was like
it really is fascinating seeing you up
close like truly your skin is phenomenal
so now becomes a question of what are
you doing on a daily basis you've talked
about things you put on your skin which
i thought was super weird but made me
want to go out and do it
um and you were talking about like
coffee grounds and all kinds of crazy
[__] so
walk us through the things that you eat
and then walk us through the things that
you apply externally okay i i consume
tons of super herbs tons of power
phenols okay um which is like cacao and
a lot of those things i eat a ton of
micro greens so that's like broccoli
sprouts micro greens yes so like little
sprouts
so when you go to japan you should be
taking sulfurifen which comes from the
broccoli sprout because it's an
incredible autophagy activator and
detoxifier so you're going to be in a
very little supplement yeah you can take
it in a supplement form you can find it
anywhere sulfurophin um is it's really
awesome okay so i take those foods those
supplements
i personally
really benefit from a ketogenic diet it
reduces the inflammation in my body
there's maybe what 15 or 20 percent of
the population that does well on a low
fat
carb rich diet but the rest of us just
are better off you know i'll very much
put myself in that camp um do you live
in ketosis like year-round
yeah i only got um really into it about
a year and a half ago myself personally
i had
um maybe eight years ago one of my
translator had cancer and so we put him
on a ketogenic diet um with his cancer
and that was many years ago and that was
based on thomas seyfried's work and
one of my children my seven-year-old has
suffered from seizures so he's ketogenic
so he was ketogenic before i was
and a year and a half ago i was just
like
i have to figure out how
i
myself my family my mother i mean you
spoke about metabolic
disorders and you know metabolic
syndrome and
and obesity and morbidly obese um when
we moved to this country my mother
developed metabolic syndrome
and uh that has been the most one of the
most painful things for me personally
because i couldn't solve it for her
so a year and a half ago i interviewed
over 80 experts and i created a
documentary called the real skinny on
fat it's a free documentary it's online
and
i got so inspired by these genius minds
that i went ketogenic and i haven't gone
back
when you're sleeping
what will happen is
you have this thing called a circadian
rhythm
and
animals are really good about not
screwing up their circadian rhythm
right like the birds don't wake up late
there's not a bird that's like you know
i don't get up until noon
right they just get up right and they go
to bed at the same time and so what that
does is it really sets this biological
clock
so that everything happens
on a 24-hour cycle
and certain hormones need to be released
at certain times
and then certain repair mechanisms need
to happen at the immune system level or
in your brain
and you can be quote unquote sleeping
but if you're not really sleeping well
like you have sleep apnea or you keep
waking up or you have a lot of anxiety
then you're not gonna be able to go into
deep sleep you're not gonna get enough
rem cycles
you know and every time you wake up you
restart the whole sleep system
because you have this thing called sleep
inertia
so
your first rem cycle takes a long time
it takes over two hours usually for you
to do that and then every successive rem
cycle it can be
um compressed
so in seven hours you could easily get
four rem cycles
but if you keep waking up you could be
in the bed for nine hours and never get
it
so i hate sleep uh if i didn't need it i
wouldn't get it i fully understand i
actually prioritize it in my life it's
one of the most important things that i
do um if i had to guess though i
averaged without an alarm clock i never
set an alarm clock i always go to bed at
the same time i'm very aware of my
circadian rhythms but just in terms of
where i'm at in my life levels of
excitement levels of stress whatever i
probably average about six to six and a
half hours of sleep a night um and
one thing that i heard is that while
you're sleeping your brain actually
shrinks and or d inflames maybe is the
right way to think about it and allows
like a a brainwashing if you will
is that what's happening or is there
something else going on
during the different phases of sleep
that make it so critical
yeah so there's a lot more going on and
really probably one of the most
important things that's going on are
the immune cells that get stimulated in
your brain
so these microglial cells and these
astrocytes that are in your brain
they're doing all the repair
and they're more active during the night
um the other thing is that your brain is
taking all the memories from the day
and you're forgetting
forgetting is really the most important
process
because
your hippocampus will just get full of
all these proteins that just get
accumulated during the during the day
you don't want to remember like every
single little detail of the day you just
don't have that capacity
and if you don't make sure that you
process all that short-term memory and
free it up
the next day you're going to be
compromising your ability to remember
this is
this is the the generational difference
between the two of us tom so so like you
know you're looking for the hacks like
what's the ideal how do i live the
longest and how do i live uh you know
and how do i optimize that and and i
have to take
everything together and i say well first
of all i don't care if i live forever i
don't want to live here i don't need to
live forever because what i'm of that
mindset
that
what defines my enjoyment of life right
now is partly offset by the knowledge
that it ain't going to be there one day
so
i'm trying to
you know meet out
the um the pleasure over a finite period
of time um again i talk about like if
there's if somebody said look you gotta
eat this mark it tastes like [__] but
you're gonna live
five years longer and you're gonna have
to eat it twice a day i'm like i'm out i
don't need i don't need to um to
sacrifice
the sort of short-term hedonistic
experience
uh that i crave you know whether it's a
serotonin or dopamine it's just i want
i'm looking for that and if you tell me
that it's been proven by science it's
going to help me live five years longer
i'm probably
going to reconsider
whether you know it's worth
the sacrifice of the of the immediate
experience because
you know as you get as we get down to
this we can talk about what happens in
20 or 50 years from now but right now
all that matters is is this moment i'm
hanging out with with tom billy we're
having a great conversation that's all
that matters to me right now uh and i
wanna i wanna be in that moment
as often as i can
um and it takes it takes work uh for it
for as long as i can
and not have to make a sacrifice of
whatever today's experience or now's
experience is because somebody did some
research that said you know
if you do
it differently and and you sacrifice
significantly
you'll live longer i'm like well okay
quality of life has to factor into the
equation
uh you know you can't just tell me i'm
i'm going to live forever and then say
but your life's going to suck and you
and you're going to some you know
whatever right so
now
i'm rambling on here sorry about that
not at all that's super interesting to
me i love that people come at this stuff
from different angles um so
to that point so you have a very
specific way of looking at the world and
you just laid it out for us if you could
only have five ingredients not five
meals but five ingredients so it could
be filet mignon it could be asparagus
what are the five things that that you
would want if that was all you could eat
for the rest of time and you wanted the
the kind of life you have now so it's
delicious but it's also you know
cognitively it's great
on and on no what's interesting is
because um
typically people ask me what are like
what are some of the things that you
wish you could eat every day
but you can't and to me it's peanuts and
beer like i could live the rest of my
life on peanuts and beer
i can't eat i can't i can't eat peanuts
because they're horrible for me and and
you know i i still like beer but i i'm
limited to like a half a glass once in a
while
um no i mean my my my favorite food of
all is lamb so you know a lamb chop
would be one
um i'd probably pick if i had to pick a
vegetable
you know broccoli is probably my
favorite vegetable um if i had to pick
um some sort of a starchy tuber uh don't
don't think i'm weird but um
um like either turnips or rutabagas with
butter i did not see that coming no
nobody does um i like to i like the real
bitter aspect of that um but i'm i'm
sort of picking one from from each of
these categories right like a fruit
if i had to pick a fruit it would be um
like being cherries i think are probably
you know one of my favorite fruits um
and uh
you know and
red wine and and i could live the rest
of my life on those on those five things
word
those are some fantastic choices respect
um so we talked about this the last time
we met i was i did a rabbit starvation
diet which was basically 85 or more
percent of my calories came from protein
took my fat as low as i could my
carbohydrates were essentially zero my
doctor love me was telling me i was
going to live forever but i felt like
[__] yeah and when you talk about steer
by how you feel and not you know worry
so much about all the things you can
measure um that seems wow there's a
great way to get more into measurement
than you uh feeling certainly trumps
everything